Reference · Agents Agent or workflow? The decision rule, the five workflow patterns, the minimal loop, and the three guardrails that must exist before a loop runs once. Compressed from Lesson 11. Made to be reread the night before. The split Both are “agentic systems.” The distinction that matters is who chooses the next step , and it is a spectrum, not a binary. Definitions verbatim from Anthropic, Building Effective Agents . Definition Next step chosen by Step count Workflow LLMs and tools orchestrated through predefined code paths . You, at write time Known before the request Agent LLMs dynamically direct their own processes and tool usage, maintaining control over how they accomplish tasks. The model, at run time Unknown until it finishes The decision rule Can you enumerate the steps before the request arrives? If yes → workflow. Write the path down; it is cheaper, faster, testable, and traces to a fixed shape. Autonomy is a price you pay for a path you couldn't write down in advance. Anthropic's own framing: add complexity “only when it demonstrably improves outcomes” ; agentic systems “often trade latency and cost for better task performance.” What does not make it an agent Tool use. A retriever is a tool. A fixed retrieve-then-answer chain is a workflow. Multiple LLM calls. A generator plus a nightly faithfulness judge is two calls and zero agency. The model deciding something . A router picks a branch: but you enumerated the branches. Autonomy without an open path is still a workflow. The one thing that does: a loop-back arrow where the next action depends on what the last one returned. The five workflow patterns: reach for these first Pattern Shape Reach for it when Prompt chaining step → step → step, fixed order The task decomposes into known stages; each stage's output feeds the next. Routing classify → one of N specialised prompts Inputs fall into distinct kinds that want different handling. Cheap and very common. Parallelization fan out → aggregate Independent subtasks, or several votes on the same one. (A nightly judge pass over 200 answers is this.) Orchestrator–workers planner splits → workers execute → merge Subtasks aren't known up front but the structure is. The most agent-like workflow. Evaluator–optimizer generate → critique → revise, until accepted or capped Quality is judgeable and iteration measurably helps. Needs a cap, like any loop. The minimal loop while steps < MAX_STEPS: # guardrail 1 step = model(question, history, tools=ALLOWED) # guardrail 2 if step.is_final: return step.answer, steps, "goal" # guardrail 3 history += run_tool(step.tool_call) ← the loop closes here steps += 1 return best_effort, steps, "cap" # guardrail 3 Every agent framework: OpenAI Agents SDK, LangGraph, CrewAI, is a wrapper around this. Knowing the twelve lines is what lets you say what a framework actually buys you. The three process guardrails Guardrail Contains Why it's non-optional Step cap Unbounded consumption: OWASP LLM10 The only agent failure that shows up on a credit card instead of in an output. A stuck loop bills until someone notices. Tool allowlist Excessive agency: OWASP LLM06 Every exposed tool is a capability reachable on a path you never imagined. Grant the minimum; a read-only tool is a different risk class from a writing one. Termination reason Silent truncation An answer returned because the cap was hit is indistinguishable from a finished one unless you record which. Cap-terminated runs are a health metric, not a footnote. Input and output guardrails sit either side of these (validate the request; validate the answer before it ships), that's the answer-defense ladder, unchanged. The loop only adds the middle column. Trajectory metrics: what you measure once the path varies A fixed chain has one call per question, so cost and latency are constants. A loop turns each into a distribution, and adds numbers that have no equivalent upstream. Attach them the same way as any other verdict (see Tracing answer quality ): Metric What a bad reading means Emit as steps (mean / max / p95) Creeping mean = the model is compensating for retrieval, not reasoning. score(name="steps", data_type="NUMERIC") terminated_by = cap rate Questions the loop cannot finish. Above a few percent, the cap is hiding a design fault. score(…, data_type="CATEGORICAL") tool_calls / question Repeated identical calls = the model is looping without learning from the result. score(…, data_type="NUMERIC") cost & latency / question Compare against the fixed-chain baseline. This is the “trade” being priced. already in the trace The non-determinism rule, extended At temperature=1 a fixed chain rewords its answer every run, so you gate on properties, not text . An agent varies on a second axis: the path . Two runs can produce the same answer in one step and in three, at triple the bill. So the trajectory joins the property set: gate on rates and distributions (hallucination count, abstention rate, mean steps, cap rate), never on the transcript. The two honest interview answers “I measured a loop against my fixed chain on a question my abstention score had flagged. It rescued it, here's what it cost per query, and here's what it did to the trap set.” “I measured it and didn't ship it. Here's the number that stopped me.” Both are senior. The weak answer is “we used an agent” with no number behind it: and that's the one an interviewer who has built agents will find in about ninety seconds.