Reference · RAG Embeddings & semantic retrieval What an encoder is, how retrieval finds a chunk, and the sentences that survive an interview. Compressed from Days 14–15 and Lesson 02. Made to be reread the night before. The vocabulary Term Is Not Encoder / embedding model A model that turns text into one fixed-length vector representing its meaning. BERT, MiniLM, BGE, OpenAI text-embedding-3-* . Not a generator. It does not predict next tokens or “read” at query time. Embedding / vector A list of numbers — a point in high-dimensional space. Similar meanings land at nearby points. Not tokens. Tokens are input IDs; an embedding is the meaning-laden output. Dimensions How many numbers per vector. MiniLM & BGE-small: 384. OpenAI small: 1536. large: 3072. Not a quality score. More dims ≠ better retrieval on your corpus. Cosine similarity The angle between two vectors. 1 = same direction, 0 = unrelated, −1 = opposite. Not distance or word overlap. Ignores vector length entirely. How retrieval works: the whole pipeline # once, offline: chunk_vecs = encoder.encode(chunks, normalize=True) # N points in the space # per query: q_vec = encoder.encode(query, normalize=True) # same space scores = q_vec @ chunk_vecs.T # normalized dot product == cosine similarity top_k = argsort(-scores)[:k] # nearest points win That is retrieval, in full. No reasoning, no understanding — just which stored points sit nearest the query point. Normalizing every vector to length 1 is what makes the dot product equal the cosine; that is the entire trick in the score line. RAG is a performance shortcut: a similarity search so you don’t push the whole corpus through an expensive model. It is empirical precisely because it is not a principled solution — which is why you measure. A miss is geometry If a relevant chunk never appears in top-k, the query vector and the answer vector landed too far apart in this encoder’s arrangement of the space. The answer is in the corpus; retrieval just never went near it. Diagnose before you fix. Two misses score 0 identically but need opposite fixes. Read coverage : near-0% = recall failure (answer never retrieved) → widen the net (encoder / hybrid / query rewrite); high coverage but still a miss = ranking failure (retrieved but ranked low) → reorder (rerank). Reranking cannot fix recall — it only reorders what you already have. The four levers, mapped to the failure each answers: Lever What it changes When it’s the fix Swap the encoder Redraws the whole space. Cheap, often the biggest single win. Broad misses; a weak baseline encoder. Try first. Reranker A second, stronger model re-scores the top-N so the best rises to the top. Right chunk is retrieved but ranked low. Hybrid / keyword search Blends exact-term matching with vectors. Rare terms, codes, names the encoder blurs together. Query rewriting Rephrases the query nearer the corpus’s language before embedding. Vocabulary mismatch between how users ask and how docs are written. Choosing an encoder: honestly Public leaderboards (MTEB) rank on other corpora, not yours. They narrow the shortlist; they do not decide. The decision is your golden set + MRR on your documents. State that out loud — it is the difference between reading a benchmark and running an evaluation. Muneeb’s measured baseline (own corpus, 20-question golden set, top-5) Encoder Dims Chunk MRR Misses minilm 384 1000 0.627 4/20 bge-small 384 1000 0.754 2/20 Same dimensions, +0.128 MRR. The win was training quality, not vector size — and it was measured , not assumed. Sentences that survive an interview What’s an embedding? “A learned vector — a point in space where nearby means semantically similar. The encoder places text there; it doesn’t generate text.” How does semantic search work? “Embed the chunks once, embed the query into the same space, rank by cosine similarity, take the top-k. It’s nearest-point search.” Why did a different encoder retrieve better? “It arranges the space better for this corpus — I measured +0.13 MRR. Both were 384-dim, so it wasn’t size; it was training.” Why did a question fail retrieval? “The query landed too far from its answer in that encoder’s space. A miss is geometry, not the LLM’s fault.”