Reference · Agents · Model Context Protocol MCP — primitives, wire, trust boundary The Model Context Protocol in the form an interviewer will probe it: what the three primitives actually distinguish, what changed in the 2026-07-28 spec that most blog posts still get wrong, and where the trust boundary moved. Compressed from Lesson 14. Made to be reread the night before an interview. Version stamp: read this first Everything below is checked against protocol version 2026-07-28 , confirmed live on 2026-08-09 . MCP shipped in November 2024 and has revised repeatedly since. Most MCP writing on the internet describes the 2025 revisions and is now wrong in at least three load-bearing places. Cite the spec version when you answer, the way you would cite a library version. modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest · check the version banner before trusting any of this card. The one durable idea What the three primitives actually are They are not three features. They are one question answered three ways: who decides this enters the model’s context? A tool is context the model pulls in, when it chooses. A resource is context the application pushes in, by its own logic. A prompt is context the user invokes, deliberately. Every argument about MCP design reduces to putting a capability on the right row of that table — and every MCP security question reduces to asking who wrote the text that arrived by each route. Server primitives: what a server offers Primitive Who controls it Methods Enters context… Tools Model tools/list · tools/call …twice: the description at list time, the result at call time Resources Application resources/list · resources/templates/list · resources/read …when your app decides — it may embed, search, or ignore Prompts User prompts/list · prompts/get …only on explicit invocation (a slash command, a button) The spec’s own words for the middle column: tools are “model-controlled, meaning that the language model can discover and invoke tools automatically” ; resources are “application-driven, giving them flexibility in how they retrieve, process, and present available context” ; prompts are “user-controlled, requiring explicit invocation rather than automatic triggering.” Each has a discovery method ( */list ) and a retrieval or execution method. Discovery being a protocol call is the whole point — it is what lets a client bind to a server it was not written for. It is also what puts a stranger’s prose in your prompt before you have called anything. Client primitives: what a client offers back Primitive Status at 2026-07-28 What it does Elicitation Current Server asks the user for input mid-request. Form mode (schema → client renders a form) or URL mode (out-of-band, for credentials — data never passes through the client or the LLM context) Sampling Deprecated Server borrowed the client’s model. “New implementations should integrate directly with LLM provider APIs.” Roots Deprecated Client told the server which directories to work in. Advisory only, never a security boundary. “Pass directories or files via tool parameters, resource URIs, or server configuration instead.” Logging Deprecated “Log to stderr (stdio transport) or use OpenTelemetry.” Saying “sampling lets the server use your model” in an interview is a dated-reading tell. It was the most-blogged MCP feature of 2025 and it is deprecated. Elicitation is the one client primitive that survived, and it now arrives through the Multi Round-Trip Requests pattern: the server answers tools/call with an InputRequiredResult carrying an elicitation/create request, the client collects the input, and the client retries the original call with inputResponses attached. Note the shape — a retry, not a callback. That is what statelessness forces. The wire, in one screen Host (the AI app) ──┬── Client 1 ──── Server A stdio local process ├── Client 2 ──── Server B stdio └── Client 3 ──── Server C Streamable HTTP remote one client per server, dedicated connection JSON-RPC 2.0 · two layers: data (primitives, discovery) / transport (stdio, HTTP) Host = the application (VS Code, Claude Desktop). Client = one connection object. Server = the thing serving context, local or remote. “Local” and “remote” describe where it runs, not what it is. stdio for a process on the same machine; Streamable HTTP (POST + optional SSE) for remote, with OAuth recommended for tokens. MCP is stateless as of 2026-07-28 . Every request carries io.modelcontextprotocol/protocolVersion , clientCapabilities and normally clientInfo in _meta , so “servers infer nothing from previous requests.” server/discover replaces the old initialize handshake and is optional — it is a convenience for fetching identity, capabilities and supported versions in one call. Responses carry ttlMs and cacheScope , so listings are cacheable. Notifications are opt-in : the client opens a long-lived subscriptions/listen stream naming the events it wants. Delivery is best-effort — poll anyway. Why tool listings are ordered and cacheable The spec asks servers to return tools in a deterministic order, and says why in a line worth quoting back: deterministic ordering “enables clients to reliably cache the tool list and improves LLM prompt cache hit rates when tools are included in model context.” Tool definitions sit in the prompt prefix. Reorder them and you have changed the prefix — the same mechanism that takes prefix caching to zero when a per-request nonce goes near the top of a system prompt. Anything that varies early in the prompt is a cache bill. See Pipeline & cost . Where the trust boundary moved MCP does not give a model new powers. It changes who wrote the text that reaches it. Under a hand-written tool, the description is a string in your file. Under MCP, it is a string a server sends you — and it lands in the model’s context before you have called anything. Channel Arrives Authored by Typically defended by… Retrieved chunk at context assembly whoever wrote the corpus delimiters + per-request nonce, if you built them Tool description at tools/list — before any call the server operator usually nothing. It is not “context,” so context defences skip it Tool result mid-loop, after a call the server operator usually nothing — and it is trusted more , because the model asked for it Resource contents when the app reads it the server operator whatever you apply to retrieved text — if you route it through the same code The spec says this outright, in the Tools page: clients MUST “consider tool annotations to be untrusted unless they come from trusted servers,” and SHOULD “validate tool results before passing to LLM” and “show tool inputs to the user before calling the server, to avoid malicious or accidental data exfiltration.” A human SHOULD be able to deny any invocation. Named attacks in the security spec Attack Shape The rule Confused deputy Proxy server with a static client ID + dynamic registration + a consent cookie → consent screen skipped, auth code redirected to the attacker Proxies MUST implement per-client consent before forwarding Token passthrough Server accepts a token minted for something else and forwards it downstream Servers MUST NOT accept tokens not explicitly issued for them State handle hijacking No protocol sessions exist, so servers mint handles (cart id, workflow id) returned as tool arguments. Guess one, act as someone else MUST NOT treat possession of a handle as authentication. Bind it server-side to the authenticated user SSRF via OAuth discovery Malicious server points metadata URLs at 169.254.169.254 or localhost Block private ranges, enforce HTTPS, validate redirect targets Local server compromise A one-click config whose “startup command” is arbitrary code, running with client privileges Clients MUST show the exact command, untruncated, and require approval Note what is not on that list: a payload written into a tool description or a tool result. The spec addresses it as a trust rule (“untrusted unless…”, “validate results”) rather than as a mitigable attack, because there is no protocol-level fix — it is indirect prompt injection arriving through a new door. Minimal server, Python SDK v2 The class is MCPServer . SDK v2 is the current line and supports 2026-07-28 ; almost every tutorial online still says FastMCP , which is v1. uv add "mcp[cli]" # server.py from mcp.server import MCPServer mcp = MCPServer("corpus") @mcp.tool() def search_corpus(query: str, k: int = 5) -> str: """Search the indexed corpus and return the top-k chunks. Args: query: the search string k: how many chunks to return """ ... @mcp.resource("corpus://manifest") def manifest() -> str: """The list of indexed documents.""" ... if __name__ == "__main__": mcp.run(transport="stdio") The type hints become the inputSchema ; the docstring becomes the description — the string that goes into every model’s context that ever connects to you. Inspect a server before trusting it: npx @modelcontextprotocol/inspector . MCP vs. plain tool-calling, the answer to give Provider tool-calling (what you already do) MCP What it standardises how one vendor’s model asks for a call how any client discovers and calls any server Tool definitions you write them, in your process fetched at runtime from a server; can change under you Beyond tools nothing — tools are the whole surface resources and prompts, i.e. the app- and user-controlled rows Trust your code, your prose someone else’s code, someone else’s prose Buys you a working agent an ecosystem — and one integration instead of N The honest one-liner: MCP is not an agent framework and not a tool-calling API. It is a client-server protocol for provisioning context, and tool-calling is one of its three primitives. It sits under the Agents SDK, not beside it — an SDK agent can take its tools from an MCP server, and the orchestration questions from Lesson 13 are unchanged by that. The three sentences to have ready 1. What it is. “A JSON-RPC protocol for provisioning context to an AI application. Three server primitives split by who decides they enter the context — tools the model pulls, resources the app pushes, prompts the user invokes.” 2. What it changes. “Not model capability — authorship. Tool descriptions and results are now written by whoever runs the server, and the description lands in context before any call. Context defences that wrap retrieved chunks don’t cover either.” 3. That you read it recently. “As of 2026-07-28 it’s stateless — server/discover , per-request _meta , no protocol sessions — and sampling, roots and logging are deprecated.”