Reference · RAG Reranking: bi-encoder wide, cross-encoder narrow Two-stage retrieval, the pool-depth trap, and the one line that defends it. Compressed from Lesson 06. Made to be reread the night before. The vocabulary Term Is Not Bi-encoder Embeds query and chunk separately into the same vector space; compared by cosine. What your retriever already is (MiniLM, BGE). Not query-aware at index time — chunks are embedded once, offline, before any query exists. That's what makes it cheap. Cross-encoder Reads the query and one candidate chunk together, in a single forward pass, and outputs a relevance score directly. Not precomputable. Needs the query at scoring time, so it only ever runs on a short list, live. Pool / candidate set The top-N chunks retrieved by the bi-encoder, handed to the reranker to re-score. N > final top-k. Not the same as top-k. Pool is the reranker's input ; top-k is what you keep after it reorders. The pipeline # stage 1: bi-encoder, cheap, wide net scores = query_vec @ chunk_vecs.T pool = top_N_by(scores) # e.g. N=20, not 5 # stage 2: cross-encoder, expensive, narrow pairs = [(query, c["text"]) for c in pool] rscores = CrossEncoder("cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L6-v2").predict(pairs) top_k = [pool[i] for i in argsort(-rscores)][:k] Stage 1 answers “what's roughly relevant?” cheaply, at any scale. Stage 2 answers “what's actually most relevant?” accurately, but only across the handful stage 1 already found. Neither stage alone is both cheap and accurate — that trade is why the two are chained instead of picking one. What it fixes, and what it can't Failure Signal Reranker helps? Recall failure Coverage near 0% — answer never in the top-k at all. No. Ranking failure, in the pool High coverage, still a miss; full-corpus rank ≤ pool size. Yes — this is the target case. Ranking failure, outside the pool Answer exists, but full-corpus rank > pool size. No — a recall failure at the pool stage. The trap: row three looks identical to row one from the outside — “I added a reranker and nothing changed.” It isn't the same failure. Before concluding a reranker didn't help, check the candidate's full-corpus rank against your pool size. A reranker that never receives a candidate can't be blamed for not surfacing it. Choosing pool depth — honestly Pick the pool size before you know where the answer landed, for a stated reason (a common default, a latency budget) — not after, by reverse-engineering it from a miss you already diagnosed. Picking the pool to fit a known answer isn't a design decision, it's answer-shopping, and it won't generalize to the next miss. Cost of widening the pool: one extra cross-encoder forward pass per extra candidate, per query — linear, and cheap in absolute terms for a MiniLM-class reranker on CPU (dozens to low hundreds of pairs is seconds, not minutes). Cost of narrowing it: real candidates fall outside the reranker's reach, silently. Narrower pools look faster in a benchmark and can be quietly wrong on exactly the long-tail question you'll be asked about in an interview. Model choice cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L6-v2 — 6 transformer layers, trained on MS MARCO query-passage relevance. The standard lightweight default: a fraction of a point of NDCG@10 behind the larger MS MARCO cross-encoders, for roughly double the throughput. Right call on CPU, on a golden set sized in the tens. Score scale, a common trap: cross-encoder scores are not cosine similarity. They aren't bounded to −1..1 and aren't comparable across models or directly to a bi-encoder's score — use them only to rank the pool, never to compare against a cosine threshold from stage 1. Defend it in one line “A reranker is a second stage: cheap bi-encoder retrieval widens the net, then a cross-encoder that reads the query and each candidate together re-scores that shortlist. It only fixes ranking failures, never recall — and I treat pool depth as its own recall boundary, checking a candidate's full-corpus rank before I trust a ‘reranking didn't help’ result.”